A slump in forecasted revenue has savaged the Federal Government's surplus plans and wiped away almost half the surpluses originally tipped for the next four years.

Key points:
The Government now expects a $23.5 billion surplus spread over the next four years, down from $45 billion
This financial year is still expected to be the first surplus in a decade, but it has been revised down about $2 billion
The Government blames a weak global economy as well as domestic issues like bushfires and drought
The mid-year budget forecasts a surplus of $5 billion this financial year, down from the $7.1 billion estimated ahead of the federal election.

The Government still expects to deliver a surplus each year for the next four years, but the latest forecast banks $23.5 billion, down from the $45 billion trumpeted in the budget.

The Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook (MYEFO) shows the Government expects revenue will be down $3 billion on earlier projections. Treasury officials have also slashed forecasted revenue by more than $32 billion.

The Government blames the hit on its budget on "weak momentum in the global economy" and "the devastating effects of drought and bushfires".

Income from the GST is tipped to be down more than $10 billion on what the Government had expected when it released its budget in April.

Wage growth for workers revised down
The negative assessment extends to workers, with unemployment now expected to be 5.25 per cent this year, up from a forecast of 5 per cent.

The Government expects unemployment to return to 5 per cent next year and remain steady in coming years.

Wage growth has also been revised down from 2.75 per cent to 2.5 per cent.

The MYEFO shows the Government expects wage growth to be below earlier forecasts annually for the next four years.

The outlook includes an additional $4.2 billion in infrastructure over the forward estimates, with Queensland set to be the biggest winner, receiving more than a quarter of the money.

Net debt is projected to be $392.3 billion in 2019-20, representing 19.5 per cent of GDP.

Real GDP is also tipped to fall 0.5 per cent to 2.25 per cent.

But the Government expects to meet its forecasted real GDP estimates in the coming years.

More to come.

Passengers have disembarked at Sydney Harbour from the cruise ship at the centre of the New Zealand volcano disaster, with some complaining about the lack of information given while on board the ship.

Key points:
Most of the those killed in the White Island volcano disaster were part of day trips from the ship
"The whole boat stopped" to listen to the news of the eruption, a passenger said
Another passenger said it felt emotional arriving in Sydney without the volcano victims
The Ovation of the Seas returned to Sydney this morning after a 12-day trans-Tasman cruise.

Most of those killed or injured in the White Island eruption were part of organised day trips from the ship.

Passenger Max Sum said "the whole boat stopped" when the news of the eruption was announced.

"When the captain announced the news, the whole boat kept silent. The whole boat stopped. Unfortunately, I did

Asked about communication on the ship, Mr Sum said it "could have been better".

On hearing the news, his 11-year-old son Russell said: "I thought it was fake news. I was like that can't be true."

Tourist Jennifer Highfield from Michigan in the United States is on an antipodean holiday and said she was grieving for her fellow passengers and the families affected.

"Those poor people, I just feel so terrible for them. I am a nurse so I know how long it is going to be for their recovery," she said.

Ms Highfield said the White Island tour was on her radar.

"That tour was our second choice if we did not go on the one we ended up doing. I just feel so sorry for them," she said.

"The ship constantly gave us information and counselling. But it would have been helpful to have free Wi-Fi to keep in touch with family and friends who were concerned. I had a package covering internet, but I know there was a lot of people on board who did not." she said.

"I felt a little bit guilty having fun when such a terrible thing happened. The captain was wonderful, we could tell it was heartbreaking for him personally. Even coming in today I felt a bit emotional.

"I think it will probably hit people later on as well, they were trying to get through the cruise and think what actually happened and how bad it was. There were those that lost their lives but there are also those in hospital," passenger Kylie Peat, from Brisbane, said.

Wild horses running through Australia's alpine country are booming in numbers under new legal protections handed to them by the New South Wales Government.

Key points:
A new survey reveals brumby numbers have grown from 9,187 to 25,318 in five years
Brumbies are culled in Victoria and the ACT, but last year were handed some protection — prohibiting lethal culling— by the NSW Government
The ACT's Environment Minister says the population needs to be managed to reduce damage to the landscape and waterways
Survey data collected by the Australian Alps Liaison Committee shows the horse population has more than doubled in just five years, again raising suggestions they should be culled.

According to the survey, the number of horses has grown from an estimated 9,187 in 2014, to 25,318 in 2019.

That amounts to a growth rate of 23 per cent per annum, despite ongoing drought conditions.

The figures have been labelled "alarming" by the ACT's Environment Minister and will likely reignite the debate over how the horses should be managed.

Brumbies are culled in both Victoria and the ACT, but last year were controversially handed a level of legal protection through the NSW Government's so-called 'Brumby Bill'.

It recognised the cultural significance of the horses and prohibited lethal culling; however, it does not prevent reducing the number of horses through non-lethal means.

ACT Environment Minister Mick Gentleman said the horses did not need to be totally eradicated, but it was clear there should be far fewer living in the Australian Alps.

"You can manage the numbers and still have some brumbies in the area," he said.

"But you really need to manage the numbers so they don't do the degradation we're seeing in Kosciuszko National Park."

The Australian Alps Liaison Committee survey revealed an extraordinary boom in horse numbers in the north-eastern corner of Kosciuszko, which takes in the Tantangara Reservoir, sitting north of Adaminaby and bordering Namadgi National Park to the north-east.

Between 2014 and 2019, numbers in that area lifted from an estimated 3,255 to 15,687 — a growth rate that could see horse numbers double nearly every two years.

The detailed survey report suggested the soaring numbers could come down to the relatively open, plains habitat in that area.

It also suggested there had been little effort to reduce the number of horses over the five years.

"There has been little or no management of the feral horse population in North Kosciuszko in the intervening period between surveys, with records showing that only 881 horses were trapped and removed from the area in that five-year period."

Further south, the number of horses has also grown steadily, but not at the same pace.

In the survey area covering Mt Kosciuszko in the north, over the border into Victoria's Alpine National Park and down to Mt Stewart in the south, numbers grew from 4,316 to 8,518.

In other areas the numbers of horses actually dropped slightly — in the north-west of Kosciuszko, east of Tumbarumba, numbers fell from 1,616 to 1,113.

There are currently no permanent horse populations within the ACT, which immediately borders the Kosciuszko National Park.

ACT authorities are determined to keep it that way, and cull horses found crossing the border into the Namadgi National Park.

The ACT's Environment Minister has called on both the NSW, Victorian and Federal Governments to take swift action on the "alarming" figures and "respect the science".

"Feral horses do not recognise state boundaries and the scientific evidence is clear — heavy-hoofed pests such as feral horses are damaging the landscape," Mr Gentleman said.

"The integrity of our high-country areas is vital to preserve the quality of Canberra's drinking water, and the water that flows from the Australian Alps, which contributes more than 30 per cent of inflows into the Murray-Darling system."

But he warned the NSW 'Brumby bill' was a roadblock that threatened to prevent serious change.

"They can't use lethal culling for horses, and that's a real issue as we see those numbers growing in Kosciuszko," Mr Gentleman said.

Despite the introduction and passage of the bill, its architect — Deputy Premier John Barilaro — previously suggested he was open to reducing the horses' numbers by 50 per cent.

Under the new figures, a cull like that across the total population would still leave more than 12,000 horses — higher than the population estimated to be living in the alps in 2016.

The NSW Government has previously rejected recommendations to reduce the number of horses in Kosciuszko to 600 over a 20-year period.

The NSW Government has been contacted for comment.

A man is in a critical condition after being shot by police in Mulgrave, in Melbourne's south-east, this morning.

Victoria Police says the man produced a knife when he was confronted by officers about 8:00am.

They were responding to reports he had assaulted a woman, police said in a statement.

Police used capsicum spray on the man before shooting him.

He has been taken to hospital in a critical condition under police guard.

Further information has not yet been released.

The statement said the Armed Crime squad would investigate the incident with oversight from Professional Standards Command, which is standard procedure.

Anyone with information about the incident is urged to contact Crime Stoppers.

More to come.

Anna Karina, the French New Wave actress and director who became an icon of cinema in the 1960s, has died of cancer at the age of 79, her agent says.

Key points:
The Danish-born actress and director starred in seven films made by French New Wave filmmaker Jean-Luc Godard
She directed her own film Vivre Ensemble (Living Together) in 1973
She has been remembered as one of the legends of French cinema by the country's culture minister
The Danish-born actress was the frequent muse of director Jean-Luc Godard, her first husband, starring in seven of his films including A Woman is a Woman, Pierrot Le Fou and Bande a Part (Band of Outsiders).

Her agent told French media she had cancer and passed away in Paris on Saturday in the company of her fourth husband, American director Dennis Berry.

"Her gaze was the gaze of the Nouvelle Vague (New Wave). It will remain so forever," French Culture Minister Franck Riester tweeted about Karina.

"Today, French cinema has been orphaned. It has lost one of its legends."

Karina, who captured film-goers with her acting and singing talents as well as her large blue doe eyes, received the best actress award at the Berlin Film Festival for her role as a femme fatale in A Woman is a Woman.

Born Hanne Karin Blarke Bayer in Denmark, she initially modelled and sang in cabarets before coming to France.

Anna Karina wearing a black hat on the red carpet of Cannes Film Festival
PHOTO: Karina's gaze was the gaze of French New Wave cinema, France's Culture Minister said. (AP: Lionel Cironneau, file)
She was reportedly discovered, and renamed, by Coco Chanel, then discovered by Godard.

But Godard was not the only director with whom Karina worked.

She starred in Jacques Rivette's 1966 film La Religieuse (The Nun), adapted from the 18th-century French novel by Diderot, a film which was initially banned.

The story of a young woman forced into the convent by her mother, who had given birth out of wedlock, was revived in a restored version and presented at the 2018 Cannes Film Festival.

She also worked, among other illustrious directors, with Luchino Visconti.

The actress later got behind the camera to direct her own movie in 1973, Vivre Ensemble (Living Together).

Films that Karina appeared in will be shown on the silver screen again with a retrospective of Godard starting next month at the Cinematheque, a noted film institution in France which she had frequented.

The French New Wave broke with traditional cinematic conventions to create a fresh approach to making movies, in keeping with the free-spirited times of the 1960s.

As the state's finances fell off a cliff, budget updates were awfully depressing affairs for West Australian treasurers for much of the decade.

Every time it appeared the numbers could not get any worse, they did.

Eventually, the state's finances slid into territory previously unimaginable.

A fall into the red, to the tune of $431 million, looked insignificant when compared to what followed — back to back years of deficits above $2 billion as the state's debt level surged towards $40 billion.

But the picture looks very different for Treasurer Ben Wyatt, as he prepares to release his final budget update of the decade.

Instead of that recurring question of "how bad is this going to be?" which preceded budget updates for years, Wednesday's mid-year review is set to be another sign of a continued dramatic improvement in the state's finances.

And with the next election edging ever closer, the Labor Government has focused on a bulging war chest to secure another four years in office.

May's budget already showed a monumental turnaround from the era of multi-billion-dollar deficits, just three years ago.

That budget estimated WA would be $1.5 billion in the black for 2019-20, with surpluses north of $2 billion predicted for the three years to follow.

But those predictions could end up being awfully modest, thanks to an iron ore price surge WA had not expected.

The latest figures showed WA was $1.6 billion in the black between July and September — in other words, $100 million more than the surplus Treasury had expected for the full year, but in just three months.

That was fuelled by a massive spike in the iron ore price and, while the commodity has cooled off from those eye-watering highs since then, it remains above the level WA had banked on.

A man holds a piece of iron ore in front of a remote-controlled truck in Sheila Valley, WA.
PHOTO: Much of the surplus is due to an increase in iron ore prices. (Reuters: David Gray)
With every dollar increase in the iron ore price worth $81 million to the state budget, that is great news for the Government.

So far this financial year, the iron ore price has averaged $17 above what the Treasurer had forecast.

Were that to continue for the rest of the year — something the Treasurer stresses is far from guaranteed — it would mean a $1 billion budget boost.

It will not all be good news — there are warnings of a hit to GST revenue due to the sluggish economy, while the lower-than-expected exchange rate will also impact royalty revenue.

The return to surplus is yet to make any real dent in debt levels either, with WA still around $40 billion in the red — and predicted to make only modest progress bringing that down over the coming years.

But, despite those factors, punters are set to see another improvement in the bottom line.

And the real consequences of that will likely become more obvious over the coming months.

Pre-poll spending spree
"Good financial management has its rewards," is a line Premier Mark McGowan has used frequently in recent weeks, as his Government has shifted from its steadfast commitment to rein in spending to a somewhat more liberal approach.

Hundreds of millions of dollars have been put towards stamp duty and payroll tax relief, school and hospital maintenance, TAFE fee cuts and housing construction, as the McGowan Government tries to stimulate an economy that is continuing to struggle.

"It is about boosting the economy, creating jobs, using our good financial management to the benefit of West Australians," Mr McGowan said recently of his Government's spending plans.

But with billions of dollars worth of surpluses on the horizon, an election looming and an economic situation which could be a political vulnerability for the Government, those commitments are likely to just be the tip of the iceberg.

The war chest appears to be building for a pre-poll spending spree, as Labor looks to make promises that will boost its chances of securing another four years in office.

Just how big that war chest will be will become a bit clearer this week.

When we think of the great rivalries of history, we often think of them in terms of conflict with a destructive end: Aaron Burr and Alexander Hamilton; Al Capone and Bugs Moran; Ned Kelly vs the law.

Of course, rivalry has also been one of the most productive forces in terms of spurring innovation — and no rivalry has had a greater effect on 20th-century art than that of Pablo Picasso and Henri Matisse.

That rivalry will be replayed on the walls of the National Gallery of Australia, Canberra, this summer in the exhibition Matisse and Picasso.

Featuring almost 200 paintings, prints, sculptures, works on paper and costumes, the exhibition begins with several works made before the two artists met in Paris in 1906 — Picasso, an angsty 24-year-old Spanish prodigy still relatively unknown; Matisse already a leader of the avant-garde of Paris at 36.

It then proceeds to explore the parallel and intersecting development of their work as they experimented with colour, form and various subjects — each man's work spurring the other's ambition.

It ends with a suite of the bright-coloured paper cut-outs that Matisse made in 1947 (when he was in his late-70s), and three paintings that Picasso made in response to his friend's death in 1954.

Colour photograph of the artist aged 79, wearing black knitted cap, camel coat and glasses, with beard, sitting in armchair.
PHOTO: Matisse in his studio, Boulevard du Montparnasse, 1948, photographed by Gisele Freund. (Supplied: National Gallery of Australia)
Matisse and Picasso is the first exhibition in Australia to consider the two artists side by side, and draws on the National Gallery of Australia's substantial collection of prints and drawings by the two artists (including Picasso's Vollard Suite, exhibited at NGA and the Queensland Gallery of Art in 2018).

It also draws on the collections of the Musée Picasso in Paris, the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Tate, as well as smaller public museums abroad, Australian state galleries, and 22 private collections. Businessman Kerry Stokes contributed two Picasso paintings and one by Matisse.

Masterpieces on display include Matisse's Still Life with Oranges, and Picasso's 1929 portrait of his wife Olga (Large nude on a red chair: a nightmarish deconstruction of her made during the nadir of their marriage) and 1932 portrait of his lover Marie-Therese (titled Reading).

The latter two, hung either side of a doorway, are on loan from the Musée Picasso and have never been exhibited in the southern hemisphere previously.

Curator Jane Kinsman, who has worked to prepare the exhibition over several years, says she was inspired by the landmark Matisse Picasso exhibition of 2002, a collaboration between New York's Museum of Modern Art, London's Tate, and the Musée Picasso and Centre Georges Pompidou in Paris.

"I could see this was a very interesting subject, and once you start digging it becomes more interesting," Kinsman told ABC Arts.

"They changed ideas about modern art."

A monumental meeting of minds
Picasso and Matisse were introduced by Gertrude and Leo Stein, brother and sister collectors and Americans in Paris, who admired both artists — and felt that they might spark one another.

In some ways the two men were quite dissimilar; besides the age gap, they had different lifestyles and personalities — Picasso unmarried, carnal, intense, and withdrawn in social situations; Matisse married and a father, more methodical in his approach to painting, and a gregarious intellectual who dominated a dinner party conversation.

Black and white photograph of Picasso in his late 50s, balding, wearing heavy overcoat and scarf, standing in studio.
PHOTO: Portrait of Picasso in his studio Rue des grands Augustins, 1939, by Brassaï. (Supplied: National Gallery of Australia)
Their art at the time was also wildly different: Matisse was a 'wild man of colour' and chief amongst the 'Fauves' group (an unflattering epithet meaning "wild beasts", applied by a French critic at the time); Picasso was on the tail end of his 'Rose period', painting subdued portraits of figures from his Montmartre neighbourhood.

But both men were intent on forging a new kind of art; both had a shared admiration of French Post-Impressionist painter Paul Cézanne, and looked to Africa for inspiration.

Critic Sebastian Smee, who wrote about their relationship in his book The Art of Rivalry, told ABC Radio National that Matisse and Picasso "were genuinely in tune with each other and learning from each other" in these early years.

"And of course [the relationship] extended throughout their lives. In a way it was like this ongoing chess match, where one artist was either ignoring or engaging — in an almost larcenous way — with the other artist's works, stealing ideas and motifs and so-on," Smee explained.

Ultimately, Matisse and Picasso took their initial shared interests and influences in different directions — Picasso becoming more interested in sculpted forms on the canvas, while Matisse focused on colour and 'flattening' the image so that foreground and background were one.

Portrait in surrealist style featuring distorted head and shoulders of a woman, skin in bright blue, background light brown.
PHOTO: Picasso's 1937 portrait of American model and artist Lee Miller, on loan from a private collection, exhibits surrealist influences. ((c) Succession Picasso/Copyright Agency)
But the National Gallery of Australia's exhibition shows how often their interests and careers intersected: suites of drawings each made in response to the same literary sources — including Ancient Greek mythology — are juxtaposed, as are the costumes that each made for the Ballet Russes.

A series of 'odalisques' by Matisse (scenes of reclining nude women, indebted both to 19th century Orientalism and the artist's travels to Morocco) find a cruel retort in Picasso's aforementioned Large Nude in a Red Armchair.

National Gallery of Australia director Nick Mitzevich says the paintings and design of the galleries are designed so that visitors might deduce various connections between the paintings of each artist.

"We didn't want to lead people through from beginning to end — we want people to free-flow backwards and forwards," he said

South-East Queensland is in for a scorcher today with the weather bureau anticipating records could be broken.

Brisbane is expected to hit 39 degrees Celsius.

Ipswich, Laidley, and Esk are all forecast to reach 43C, while Boonah and Beaudesert will head towards 42C.

The Bureau of Meteorology's Jonty Hall said the hot conditions were blowing in from the west.

"It is certainly going to be a warm day around the place," he said.

Where do heatwaves come from

Heatwaves can be deadly and can occur anywhere in Australia. But where do they really come from?
"Westerly winds are going to push pretty much all the way to the coast in South-East Queensland today so it's going to lead to quite a hot day really wherever you are in the south-east today."

He said temperatures would test December records in places.

"Gatton's record is 42 degrees and we're actually forecasting 43 so were fairly confident that one is going to go," Mr Hall said.

"Amberley's record is 43.8C … we're forecasting 43.4C, so pretty close. That one could be knocked off today as well.

"The slightly brighter news is it's really the last one. We've got a bit of relief coming through late today in the form of a south-easterly wind change, then some slightly milder conditions for a couple of days."

Dry, hot weather will mean extreme fire danger for the Darling Downs and Granite Belt today.

A severe fire danger is forecast for Central Highlands, Coalfields, South-East Coast, Wide Bay and

A man has been charged with the murder of Sarah Gatt, whose body was found in the bathtub of her unit in Melbourne's inner west almost two years ago.

Key points:
A 52-year-old Thomastown man will face court today charged with Ms Gatt's murder
Her body was discovered in her unit in Kensington in January last year
Investigators previously said they believed she was attacked in April 2017
Homicide squad detectives yesterday charged a 52-year-old Thomastown man with one count of murder.

He will face the Melbourne Magistrates' Court today.

Ms Gatt's body was found in her unit in Lambeth Street, Kensington, on January 3, 2018, when police smelled a bad odour while visiting the street for an unrelated matter.

Police last year said they believed Ms Gatt had been attacked in April 2017, and her body had been in the home for more than eight months.

In March last year, investigators said they believed someone was living at the property "on and off" when Ms Gatt's body was found.

Gabriella Sheh loves attending her after-school maths class on Sydney's north shore.

The 10-year-old enjoys it for one reason in particular — the abacus.

"I think it's probably heaps better than a calculator because with a calculator you just press some buttons but here you use your brain," says Gabriella, who is learning to use the abacus at CMA Mental Arithmetic, a coaching college in Chatswood.

Six-year-old Anthony Hua, the youngest student in the class of eight primary school students, is also an abacus enthusiast.

With remarkable speed, Anthony is able to add up a series of double-digit numbers by sliding small beads up and down columns inside a rectangular frame.

"It's fun. I like pinching the beads," he says.

Widely used in Asia, the abacus is gaining traction in Australia as parents seek to boost their children's maths performance and connect them with their cultural heritage.

Maths teacher Benson Ng, who runs the class, first learnt how to use the abacus in Taiwan more than a decade ago and has been teaching in Australia since 2009.

Students start out using the physical abacus to add, subtract, multiply and divide multi-digit numbers, Mr Ng says, before progressing to what's known as 'mental abacus' where they visualise moving the beads in their mind.

Mr Ng says, in contrast to a calculator, using the abacus stimulates mental growth.

"They become sharper, they can calculate it [equations] straight away."

The benefits also go beyond maths, he says.

"It trains the brain to be active and in a way it's good for memory, good for imagination, listening and observation."

Tracy Li, whose two sons are in the class, agrees. She remembers learning the abacus as a child in Guangzhou and wants her Australian-born boys to have the same opportunity.

"I've known the abacus since I was back in China 17 years ago. Back then I did it as an after-school class," Ms Li says.

"It is a traditional Asian tool but it's a good brain development program too. It's helped my sons do basic calculations."

Invented in China in the 1400s, the abacus was once a common tool used by shopkeepers and accountants until cash registers and computers took over in the 20th century.

Its commercial use has waned, but the abacus remains popular as a maths-teaching tool for school children across Asia, including in China, Korea and Japan.

In Japan, where it is known as "soroban", the abacus is taught in schools and there are even national tournaments where hundreds of students race each other to solve equations.

While its popularity continues in Asia, Steson Lo, from the School of Psychology at UNSW, says more students are taking to the abacus in Australia.

"The rise in afterschool abacus classes seem to have really exploded in the last 10 years or so, particularly in the major cities in Australia but I've also heard it gaining traction in smaller cities," Dr Lo says.

"There is a long history of abacus instruction in Asian countries and some parents find these sorts of activities familiar and so want to help their children engage with the activities they once learned."

Dr Lo says given Australian students are struggling with maths compared to their international peers, the abacus has the potential to go mainstream.

The Programme for International Student Assessment this month showed the average 15-year-old Australian student is performing just above the OECD average in maths.

It also showed the average Australian student was three years behind their Chinese counterpart in the subject — more than a year behind where Australia was in 2003.

"It would be really interesting and exciting to have aspects of the abacus curriculum incorporated in the Australian curriculum," Dr Lo says.

"Students learn in different way so if there is a different way for students to think about the same mathematical problem it's always a positive thing."

It's been a very unusual year for Australia's most productive grain growing state, with some regions faring better than others.

Key points:
Farmers is in parts of WA say this year's harvest was all but over before it started
The estimated tonnage reaped is down significantly from last year, and well below 10-year averages
Those affected say they are trying to adapt to the conditions, and have plenty of sympathy for their east coast counterparts
Western Australia is on track to produce just 5.3 million tonnes of wheat compared to 9.6 million tonnes last year, and production is down across all grains.

An estimated total of 11.2 million tonnes has been collected, which is a long way down on last year's record harvest of more than 17.9 million tonnes.

Along the state's south coast, farmers are traditionally on the headers right through until the end of the year, but for 2019, the machines are already packed up.

Done and dusted
The harvest is in the bins weeks ahead of schedule for Derek Curwen, who farms in South Stirling, about an hour north of Albany.

"I've said to my boys, 'put this one in your diary, because I won't see us finishing before December for another 35 years,'" Mr Curwen said.

"Every year in farming is different and it has been for the last 30 years.

"Variable weather on the south coast — you never know what you are going to get."

Climate scientists have cautioned against "crying wolf" on the unfolding impacts of climate change, as new research suggests a dramatic upswing in heatwaves across northern Australia.

Key points:
The Australia Institute predicts Broome will have 195 days a year above 35C by 2050, and 286 days a year by 2090
A respected climate scientist is wary of the research and cautious about overstating forecasts, believing people "will stop listening"
A CSIRO researcher, whose data was used in the report, says while some predictions are high others "seem reasonable"
Released by think tank The Australia Institute this week, the Kimberley HeatWatch report pointed to an unprecedented rise in hot weather across the West Australia's Kimberley by the end of the century.

The paper, commissioned by local conservation group Environs Kimberley, suggested that without adequate policies to reduce global temperatures, the number of "extreme heat days" where temperatures reach 35 degrees Celsius and over would increase dramatically each year.

"Extreme heat days in Broome are projected to increase from an average of 81 days above 35 degrees, to up to 195 days by 2050 and potentially up to 286 days by 2090," the report said.

Under the same scenario, the paper stated that Derby and Kununurra would be hit with up to 328 extreme heat days a year by 2090, Halls Creek 284, and Bidyadanga — WA's largest remote community — 327 days.

That situation — defined by the paper as the "business as usual" situation of high-polluting governments failing to reduce carbon emissions — would also lead to substantial increases in days over 40C and nights over 25C, the report found.

Coupled with the region's humid, tropical climate, the report argued the temperature jump posed significant risks to residents' health and welfare.

Economic prospects would also take a hit, the report stated, with the Kimberley's key tourism, agriculture and construction industries all likely to be impacted by the estimated temperature increase.

It said emissions-reduction policies designed to limit global temperature increases to the globally accepted target of 1.5C were the key way to stabilise and limit the temperature increases.

Report's forecasting questioned
The report's catastrophic forecasts have been difficult to independently verify.

Curtin University climate scientist and Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change contributor, Peter Newman, said this was particularly clear at the more extreme end.

The voice of a generation?
The voice of a generation?
Greta Thunberg inspired a global movement for climate action, but some haven't welcomed her message.
"I don't know they could claim there is a real basis for what they're saying," Professor Newman said.

"Other than that it is getting hotter; but that much hotter? I'm not so sure."

Professor Newman said the dire forecasts ran the risk of emboldening opponents of climate action if they were not eventually met.

"If you overstate and you're crying wolf all the time, people stop listening to you."

The Australia Institute's Peter Ogge defended the research and said outlining the seriousness of the situation was critical.

"I'm confident that the increase in days over 35C will definitely be of that order of magnitude," he said.

"We've highlighted how bad it could get, but we've included the full range of projections in there.

"I think it's just really important we tell people the truth about what's going on — I don't think watering it down really helps anyone in the long run."

Data backs temperature increases: CSIRO
CSIRO regional climate research team leader, John Clarke, whose data underpinned many of the report's conclusions, said plotting and predicting climate models was always a challenging prospect.

"The value for Broome for days over 35C are, I would say, higher than they should be, but the values for the other locations and Broome days over 40C seem reasonable to me," he said

"I think the 60 days [over 40C for Broome] is probably plausible.

"The general story that extreme heat is getting worse is absolutely uncontentious."

He said modelling indicated a broad range of potential temperature outcomes; with the report focusing on the highest projected results.

"They have emphasised the upper limits and that's because of the message they want to convey," Mr Clarke said.

"It would have been good if they'd also spoken about the minimums, but even the minimums are a pretty nasty increase in temperature."

Christmas is a big deal for Townsville woman Glenda Worrall, who dresses her house in lights and her husband as Santa Claus.

But this year the house is dull, having been hit by the floods that devastated parts of the North Queensland city in February.

Her Christmas display — typically one of the best in her suburb, Idalia — has been replaced by a large grey skip bin on the front lawn.

Two young children approach a man dressed as Santa who sits on a chair and hands out lollies. Lots of lights in the background
PHOTO: Christmas time at Glenda Worrall's house in 2018. (Supplied: Glenda Worrall)
The Worrall home, and others on the street, are usually full of joy on December 25 but they will be empty this year.

"It's a bit sad. It would have been nice ... for my grandchildren to come here for Christmas," Mrs Worrall said.

"We were all aiming for Christmas ... It was like this big benchmark of we're all going to be back in our home."

Shelly and Andrew Johnston have been renting a house across the road from their flood-hit Railway Estate home.

They were told they could return by Christmas, so they organised for their children and grandchildren to drive from Sydney to celebrate in their restored home.

As you take your first step into Margaret Hendry School's 'classroom' you might feel disoriented — there are no rows of desks, and there is no board at the front to point yourself towards.

Instead, before you is a space with high chairs, low round tables, beanbags and benches, with students sitting alone reading, in groups talking and sharing, at benches on computers and at workshop tables making Christmas cards.

Around the edges are private booths set up variously as a green screen studio, a reading nook, a chillout space and a dedicated study room with soothing classical music playing through the speakers.

And there is not a 'teacher' in sight.

The students love it.

Students play amid a small room full of arts and crafts material.
PHOTO: Rooms have been designed specifically to suit the needs of the current students, and are adaptable as the cohort changes. (Jake Evans)
Jiya, who wants to be an Olympian, said the range of options meant if something was too easy, you could seek out a challenge elsewhere, or the opposite if something was too tricky.

Sanchi, a future space scientist, said it was fun to work with different people and not be in a set group with a single teacher giving instructions.

And Gus, who was elected by his class as Minister for Play, said not sitting at his desk all the time and being able to get up and talk to friends meant he was able to give himself a "brain break".

'Learning coaches' are Margaret Hendry's new teachers
Margaret Hendry School in Taylor is Canberra's newest school, which opened in the first term of 2019.

It is a model school for the ACT Government's 10-year 'future of education' strategy, and its principal Kate Woods said the goal was to bust apart the traditional approach to teaching.

"We're moving away from the old factory model of education, where we taught children based on age and curriculum content for a particular cohort," Ms Woods said.

A woman smiles at the camera.
PHOTO: Principal Kate Woods says Margaret Hendry school is built on four values: connection, growth, collaboration and love.
Instead, its teachers call themselves "learning coaches", who, rather than teach a single grade, work alongside several other coaches in a "neighbourhood" of students who are different ages, but are at similar stages in their learning.

"With the learning coaches operating in the way they do, there could be 75 children in a neighbourhood with three members of staff, and children have the opportunity to link in and connect with the member of staff they feel most connected to and most comfortable with throughout the course of the day," Ms Woods said.

Learning coach Maxine Galante said the approach meant students were not bound by their age.

"You can't actually tell what lesson is happening at what time of the day — you might be in a maths workshop while some children are out developing their gross motor skills, meanwhile another child is working on their writing goals," Ms Galante said.

"[It's] really trying to work out what a child needs, and provide them with that personalised timetable so they can grow in a way that's really meaningful to them."

A student sits in a small space quietly reading.
PHOTO: The 'reading nook' is one of many breakaway rooms students can use to achieve their own learning goals. (ABC News: Jake Evans)
The Margaret Hendry approach is not just about designing a school that works better for its children — its goal is to also prepare children for a world that is unpredictable.

"We really do want to create informed citizens who are actively engaging in their community and thinking about the impact they can have."

"It's not just reading, writing and maths, there is far more involved ... leadership, self-management, being an effective collaborator and communicator."

Designing a school children want to attend
A woman kneels to a table where several students are working.
PHOTO: Several learning coaches work with a group of students to enable a more flexible class that can tackle a variety of tasks at once. (ABC News: Jake Evans)
University of Canberra's Associate Professor in Education Kerrie Heath said the traditional classroom no longer prepared children for the modern workplace.

"If it's always teacher telling you what to do and you're never having to make decisions, that's not producing the kind of innovative and entrepreneurial young people we want," Professor Heath said.

"[And] if you think about that traditional model in its most traditional form it implies that every child is learning at the same rate with the same depth every single day. That actually isn't the case."

Professor Heath said changing approaches to learning were not about allowing kids to "choose their own adventure", rather that more personalised learning reduced the chances of children slipping through the cracks.

"This isn't stepping away from teacher-led learning into just children directing all of their own learning, this is about personalising learning to meet the needs of every child," Professor Heath said.

Ms Woods said that has helped to make school a place children look forward to.

"Taking away some of those barriers around the learning neighbourhood being so constrictive, they've got choice, they've got opportunity," she said.

he history of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation is a story of Australia's relationship with Asia and the Pacific.

Key points:
The ABC celebrates 80 years of international broadcasting this year
Radio Australia started out as a propaganda tool, but became a trusted news source
However budget cuts have seen the ABC's overseas presence dip
For eight decades now, ABC broadcasts have reached lonely atolls in the Pacific as well as some of the planet's largest population centres in Asia.

But the ABC's international operations have come a long way from their origins in 1939.

Designed to compete as a propaganda service during World War II, radio programs were broadcast in the languages of both Australia's allies and its enemies: initially in French, Dutch, German and Spanish, and after 1942 in Japanese, Thai, Indonesian and Mandarin.

Launched as Australia Calling, it was later changed to Radio Australia. The Commonwealth Department of Information handed Radio Australia to the ABC to operate at arm's length, and it became a permanent fixture in 1950.

A photo of female Radio Australia announcers in the 1960s. Some wear traditional clothing, one woman is holding a vinyl record.
PHOTO: By the 1960s, Radio Australia was broadcasting in many of Asia's most widely spoken languages. (ABC Archives)
Radio Australia's purpose in those first decades was to expand its foreign language services and reach as many continents as possible, relaying Australian news and views to expats and foreigners alike.

Listen to Radio Australia
Listen to Radio Australia
You can hear Radio Australia live via internet streaming, on-demand audio and podcasts, or in your area through 24-hour FM stations, local relay stations or live satellite.
But more recent decades have seen dramatic cuts to the ABC's global presence, and while Australian stories are still being told overseas, questions remain over the future of international broadcasting.

"It's so important that Australia has a voice in this region, because there's so much misunderstanding between our cultures, and it is a different culture," Prodita Sabarini, executive editor of The Conversation Indonesia and an ABC content user, told the documentary Australia Calling.

"Without that voice, I don't think we would be able to really understand our neighbour."

Radio Australia's powerful impact on places like China
Radio Australia receives its weekly mail in 1969. Envelopes are all over the mail room floor, and staff appear very busy.
PHOTO: Radio Australia received hundreds of thousands of letters each year from China alone. (ABC Archives)
In places like China, the "soft diplomacy" of the ABC's short-wave radio service gave listeners a very different view of the world than that allowed under chairman Mao Zedong.

China only had the Communist Party-authorised state media. Suddenly Radio Australia gave them a new perspective.

Mao's legacy lives on
Mao's legacy lives on
The anniversary of the Tiananmen Square massacre proves the more things change in China, the more they stay the same, writes Stan Grant.
The popularity of Radio Australia was enormous, and the service received hundreds of thousands of letters each year from China alone.

But former China correspondent Helene Chung, who was also the ABC's first female foreign correspondent, said the differences between the two countries in those decades were clear to see.

Former ABC China correspondent Helene Chung at Tiananmen Square. The Forbidden City can be seen in the background.
PHOTO: Chung was at Tiananmen Square in 1989, and says many people in China still do not know about the massacre. (ABC Archives)
"It was a very backward place. All the Chinese women were in blue suits, flat shoes, no make-up at all, and short-cropped hair," she said.

Being posted to Beijing from 1983 to 1986 was a profound experience for Chung, who grew up in Hobart.

"When I began working for the ABC, I didn't really think about my identity at all," she said.

"I always thought of myself as Australian-born Chinese, neither Chinese nor Australian, but going to China convinced me — I was not Chinese, I was definitely Australian."

Over time, she has watched China change rapidly, becoming one of the wealthiest countries in the world.

However one thing has not changed: Beijing's censorship of domestic as well as foreign media like the ABC, which was blocked in China last year.

Helene Chung, in the Communist Party compound in 1985, interviewing General Secretary Hu Yaobang.
PHOTO: Chung, in the Communist Party's compound in 1985, interviews general secretary Hu Yaobang. (ABC Archives)
"The Chinese media is very repressed … As we speak, the Chinese people are not getting the truth about the demonstrations in Hong Kong and any other events," Chung said.

"Chinese in China still don't know about the Tiananmen Massacre. So it's very important that news services such as Australia's balanced ABC be heard by the Chinese.

Australia's voice goes silent as crises unfold across region
Space to play or pause, M to mute, left and right arrows to seek, up and down arrows for volume.
VIDEO: ABC Chair Ita Buttrose says cuts to Radio Australia were "a bad decision". (ABC News)
In 1993, after more than 40 years of Radio Australia, the ABC expanded its international broadcast role to television — but it was shut down four years later when federal budget cuts gutted the corporation.

Radio Australia's operating budget was effectively halved, leading to the axing of its Cantonese, Thai and French services, and the closure of its short-wave transmitter to South-East and North-East Asia. The transmitter's signal was sold to Christian missionaries.

A promotional image showing Radio Australia's French language service team in 1995.
PHOTO: Radio Australia's French language service, staff of which are pictured in 1995, was closed after the 1997 cuts. (ABC Archives)
This meant the ABC could no longer broadcast independently across China and Indonesia, and instead had to rely on local partner stations which agreed to rebroadcast Radio Australia's programs — hopefully without censorship.

"[The Howard government] wanted to close Radio Australia and Australian television altogether," former foreign minister Alexander Downer told the ABC.

The argument was that the ABC had too much money, and the government should not fund it to do foreign work.

"I successfully fought that. And including in cabinet meetings, explaining to the cabinet that this was an element of Australian soft power, they certainly didn't all agree with me," Mr Downer said.

Newspaper editorials were scathing: The Australian, in August 2000, declared that the "Howard Government's approach to Radio Australia has been short-sighted, incoherent and irresponsible".

Space to play or pause, M to mute, left and right arrows to seek, up and down arrows for volume.
VIDEO: The cuts came just before tumultuous riots in Jakarta in 1998. (ABC News)
The reduction in services came as multiple crises were unfolding on Australia's doorstep.

Unrest across Indonesia in 1998 led to the fall of strongman leader Suharto, and little more than a year later, bloodshed in Timor-Leste saw an Australian-led peacekeeping force deployed to the region.

40 years of the ABC in Indonesia

In the ABC's Indonesia bureau in Jakarta, office manager Yanti — who is of Chinese descent — has been a constant presence for nearly 40 years as her country braved turmoil and unrest.
Until the cuts, hundreds of thousands of Indonesians had listened to Radio Australia.

"I think it was a bad decision," current ABC Chair Ita Buttrose said of the cuts.

"It's reduced the impact of what we do. Radio Australia doesn't have the same kind of voice it used to have."

The Howard government later backflipped on television broadcasts, supporting the ABC's return to an international service in 2001.

It lasted just over a decade until, suddenly and unexpectedly, the Abbott government pulled the plug one year into a 10-year funding deal.

'We depend on the ABC': Short wave cut in the Pacific
Vanuatu's Prime Minister Charlot Salwai, interviewed for the documentary Australia Calling.
PHOTO: Vanuatu's Prime Minister Charlot Salwai says ABC short-wave broadcasts saved lives in his country. (Australia Calling: Aaron Hollett ACS)
The ABC later cut its remaining short-wave radio broadcasts to the Pacific region in January 2017, arguing the technology was outdated.

Radio Australia's former short-wave frequencies were subsequently snapped up by China Radio International, China's state-owned broadcaster.

Shortwave evades dictators and warns of disasters

The ABC's decision to end Radio Australia's shortwave service has raised questions about who will fill the void.
The decision to end short-wave radio caused deep concern for some Pacific leaders; short-wave transmissions are capable of reaching remote islands not serviced by FM radio, providing emergency information and warnings.

"Radio Australia short wave saves lives, especially during natural disasters," Vanuatu Prime Minister Charlot Salwai said.

Mr Salwai said Radio Australia's short-wave service was a vital lifeline when Cyclone Pam struck his country in 2015, and while they are attempting to build their own radio capacity, many ni-Vanuatu still rely on ABC broadcasts.

A father and son stand in the ruins of their Port Vila home
PHOTO: Cyclone Pam, one of the most powerful storms to hit the Pacific, killed at least 15 people in Vanuatu. (Reuters: Dave Hunt)
"You save lives by informing people that a cyclone is coming," he said.

"When we don't have any coverage, we depend on the ABC."

'Time to review': Buttrose calls for ABC international 're-think'
Australia's voice in the region has now moved into a very crowded digital world.

Based in the ABC's Asia-Pacific Newsroom, Erwin Renaldi works on digital content in his native language, Bahasa Indonesia, hoping to bridge a deep cultural divide.

Diverse communities shape ABC News coverage
Diverse communities shape ABC News coverage
In addition to on-the-ground reporting from correspondents around the world, a team of specialist digital storytellers and bilingual journalists is producing innovative coverage of international news.
"[Indonesia and Australia] are very close geographically but we are so different," he said.

"What we are trying to do is more creating the conversation between young people, particularly young people, to address that misunderstanding."

The ABC is increasingly trying to reach international audiences through the internet; the ABC's iview streaming service is now available to overseas users via an app, and the ABC News website also offers articles in Chinese and Tok Pisin.

The ABC's Chinese service
The ABC's Chinese service
The ABC Chinese Service provides trusted news, analysis, and features to keep you up-to-date with the stories that matter.
It is also still broadcasting television overseas through ABC Australia, however this is all done on a relatively tight budget.

By way of comparison, China has $3 billion for its China Central Television (CCTV) service, and the BBC has $500 million. The ABC's international operations budget is just $11 million, the same as it was in the 1980s.

"It's time to review this, we have a wonderful reputation in the Asia-Pacific region," Ms Buttrose said.

"We are trusted, people know we deliver reliable news and programs — it's the sort of trust you cannot get any other way.

Members of Radio Australia's PNG language service, including journalist Caroline Tiriman and Geoff Ward.
PHOTO: ABC journalists, like Radio Australia's Caroline Tiriman (centre), have become trusted voices across the region over the decades. (ABC Archives)
With the Australian Broadcasting Corporation celebrating 80 years of international broadcasts this year, she said it was a good time to re-examine what the ABC's role should be in this field.

"I'm an optimist — I hope that by talking about these issues … there will be a re-thinking of as a nation where we want to ABC International to go," she said.

"I think it should be forward. I think it should be playing that soft-power diplomacy role that it does so well."

Australia Calling will air tonight at 9:20pm on the ABC, and Friday night at 8:30pm on ABC Australia.

Bianca Hackett always wanted to study child care. But just months after signing up for a diploma, her training college collapsed.

Key points:
Bianca Hackett was left with an $18,000 debt when her training college collapsed
The VET Ombudsman has more than 7,000 active complaints
A government redress scheme has seen almost $500 million of unfair debt written off
She quickly found herself with an $18,000 debt and no qualifications.

"There was a lot of reassurance that we would be looked after, and we weren't," Ms Hackett told 7.30.

"I've suffered depression and anxiety ever since."

Ms Hackett is one of thousands of students who were victims of vocational training college providers operating under what was known as the VET FEE-HELP scheme.

Under the VET FEE-HELP scheme, registered training organisations received federal subsidies upfront from the Federal Government for signing up students to training courses.

Know more about this story?
Email Paul Farrell on farrell.paul@abc.net.au
Contact Paul Farrell on Signal: +61457262172
"There really was a lack of rules or protections built into this scheme, which meant that private providers or marketers even could sign students out and get paid straight away just for the enrolment," Gerard Brody from the Consumer Action Law Centre told 7.30.

The Australian Federal Police (AFP) has pursued some college owners for running "ghost colleges", which operate fraudulent enterprises with no real teaching in order to reap those subsidies.

In some extreme cases, students were even signed up for courses without their knowledge.

'Very stressful, very upsetting'
Sage training college advertisement
PHOTO: Sage training colleges collapsed in 2017. (Supplied)
Ms Hackett signed up for a childhood diploma at the Sage Institute in Brisbane in 2016.

She paid an $18,000 fee that was added to her VET FEE-HELP loan and was excited to attend classes.

"It was really professional," she said.

"You got your uniform, you got a backpack, all that kind of stuff."

But in 2017 she received a message on Facebook advising her not to come in because the college had closed.

Sage eventually ceased trading due to insolvency and all its campuses across the country closed. It was not one of the colleges pursued by the Australian Federal Police for any wrongdoing.

Ms Hackett tried to find another college to accept her to complete her training but because she had already taken out one loan, she was unable to take on another.

"It was very stressful, very upsetting," she said.

"Just not knowing where to go, not knowing what to do."

Debt wiped
Head shot of wearing glasses and suit with no tie
PHOTO: Gerard Brody says unfair debts cancelled by the redress scheme so far may only be the tip of the iceberg. (ABC News)
The Federal Government has made significant changes to tighten up the scheme.

It abolished the debts and renamed the fee scheme VET Student Loans.

And it created a redress scheme to waive some existing debts.

In October this year, Ms Hackett learnt she could take up her concerns with the VET Ombudsman under this scheme.

She lodged a complaint in October, and just weeks ago received welcome news; her debt would soon be waived.

"I'm relieved that the debt's gone," she said.

"But I'm still very disappointed and feel let down."

Mr Brody said the redress scheme was working well to resolve unfair debts, but he believed there may be thousands of students who still have debts — some potentially without their knowledge.

"I worry that it's the tip of the iceberg, given there was over $6 billion involved in the scheme overall," he said.

Complaints up 200 per cent
Bianca Hackett sitting on a chair holding her sleeping daughter in her lap
PHOTO: Bianca Hackett says the college collapse and debt took an emotional and financial toll on her family. (ABC News)
The latest figures from the VET Ombudsman shows that a staggering $462 million in bad debts was wiped from 36,000 students since the redress scheme came into operation.

There are strong indications that figure could rise — there are more than 7,000 active complaints still with the ombudsman, and a wait of up to 12 months to assess them.

There has also been a rapid spike in the number of complaints in the last three months, with a 200 per cent increase in the July to September 2019 period.

There are likely to be other students, like Ms Hackett, who are still unaware they can potentially have their debts wiped.

"It's happening over the place. And it shouldn't be," Ms Hackett said.

"We're the ones who suffer from it mentally, emotionally and financially."

Scotland's First Minister Nicola Sturgeon has warned Prime Minister Boris Johnson he cannot keep Scotland in the United Kingdom against the country's will.

Key points:
Mr Johnson remains opposed to a second independence referendum for Scotland
With Brexit looming, Ms Sturgeon says Scotland wants the right to choose its own future
Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn has apologised for his party's crushing defeat in the UK election
Scots voted in an independence referendum in 2014 to remain in the United Kingdom, but they also voted in the 2016 Brexit referendum to stay in the European Union, while a majority of English and Welsh voters supported leaving the bloc.

Ms Sturgeon demanded another independence referendum on Friday (local time), after her Scottish National Party (SNP) won a better-than-expected 48 out of Scotland's 59 seats in the UK Parliament in Thursday's UK election.

Mr Johnson's Conservative Party won a resounding victory, claiming 365 of the 650 seats in the House of Commons. Labour took 203 seats, its worst total since 1935.

Mr Johnson told Ms Sturgeon on Friday he would not agree to another independence vote, with the Scottish public having already backed remaining in the United Kingdom in a 2014 poll.

A piper leads a group of protesters who are holding a banner with the word Brexit is it worth it on it 
PHOTO: Protesters wave EU flags as they take part in a demonstration to demand a vote on the Brexit deal between Britain and the EU in Edinburgh. (Reuters: Russell Cheyne, file photo )
"The Prime Minister made clear how he remained opposed to a second independence referendum, standing with the majority of people in Scotland who do not want to return to division and uncertainty," Mr Johnson's office said in a statement.

"He added how the result of the 2014 referendum was decisive and should be respected."


Nicola Sturgeon
✔
@NicolaSturgeon
And I made clear that @theSNP mandate to give people a choice must be respected - just as he expects his mandate to be respected. https://twitter.com/nickeardleybbc/status/1205552300531552256 …

Nick Eardley
✔
@nickeardleybbc
Boris Johnson has spoken tonight to @NicolaSturgeon:

No 10: “The Prime Minister made clear how he remained opposed to a second independence referendum, standing with the majority of people in Scotland who do not want to return to division and uncertainty"

14.5K
4:21 AM - Dec 14, 2019
Twitter Ads info and privacy
4,699 people are talking about this
But Ms Sturgeon said Mr Johnson needed to "focus on reality" and recognise the Scottish National Party (SNP) had been given a mandate for a second independence referendum.

Ms Sturgeon said on Twitter she had told the Prime Minister her political mandate to give people a choice must be respected, "just as he expects his mandate to be respected"

And she told the BBC's Andrew Marr Show, "If he thinks … saying no is the end of the matter then he is going to find himself completely and utterly wrong."

"You cannot hold Scotland in the union against its will ... If the United Kingdom is to continue it can only be by consent. And if Boris Johnson is confident in the case for the union then he should be confident enough to make that case and allow people to decide."

Ms Sturgeon said on Friday her semi-autonomous Government in Edinburgh would next week publish a detailed case for a transfer of power from London that would allow her to hold a second independence referendum.

"Scotland very clearly wants a different future to the one that's been chosen by much of the rest of the UK, and Scotland wants to have the right to choose its own future," she said.

Corbyn apologises for Labour's defeat
Meanwhile, Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn apologised on Sunday for his party's crushing defeat in the British general election but defended his campaign, which failed to resonate with the party's working-class base, as "one of hope rather than fear".

Mr Corbyn has pledged to stand down as the decimated party's leader and the manoeuvring to replace him has begun.

"I'm sorry that we came up short and I take my responsibility for it," Mr Corbyn wrote in a letter published in the left-leaning Sunday Mirror newspaper.

But he also said his party's ambitious, big-spending policy platform was popular and criticised the British media for its portrayal of Labour.

British opposition Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn, standing in front of a polling station sign.
PHOTO: Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn took responsibility for his party's election defeat. (AP: Thanassis Stavrakis)
"I remain proud of the campaign we fought. I'm proud that no matter how low our opponents went, we refused to join them in the gutter," Mr Corbyn wrote. "And I'm proud that our message was one of hope, rather than fear."

Mr Corbyn was widely criticised for his perceived tolerance of anti-Semitism in his inner circle.

Mr Corbyn's policies failed to energise voters weary of more than three years of political wrangling over Britain's divorce from the European Union.

Mr Johnson's campaign, meanwhile, revolved around three words: "Get Brexit done."

Mr Johnson's 80-seat majority means he is well placed to complete the first part of that Brexit process by pushing through legislation in time for Britain to leave the EU by the January 31 deadline.

Deputy Finance Minister Rishi Sunak said Mr Johnson intended to bring back Brexit legislation to Parliament before Christmas.

"The overriding mandate that we have from this election is to get Brexit done … We will leave the European Union in a matter of weeks, by the end of January. Our intention is to bring the withdrawal bill, the legislation, back to Parliament before Christmas," Mr Sunak told the BBC's Andrew Marr Show.

Family, friends, colleagues, local politicians and even complete strangers have gathered in a Brisbane park to hold a vigil for two Queensland victims of the New Zealand volcano disaster.

Key points:
Julie Richards and Jessica Richards were the first confirmed victims of the tragedy
The family's spokesperson said the candlelight vigil at their local park was a fitting tribute for the pair
Gold coins were collected at the vigil and will be donated to hospital burns units
Mother Julie Richards, 47, and her daughter Jessica, 20, were visiting White Island as part of a holiday in New Zealand when it erupted.

They were remembered on Sunday night with an emotional Maori performance, live music, speeches, and a display by Jessica's AFL club.

Family spokesperson John Mickel said the community-led vigil held at the Calamvale District Park was a fitting tribute to the pair.

Portraits of Julie and Jessica Richards are propped up in the dark, with candles surrounding both pictures. 
PHOTO: Candles and lights illuminate photos of Julie and Jessica Richards. (ABC News: Talissa Signato )
"I think the community wanted to show huge support," he said.

"Both people were heavily involved in sport … Jess was involved in AFL and Julie was a tremendous indoor cricketer.

"Both loved outdoor adventures.

"It is a tremendously sad journey obviously for all the families, but this is a Queensland story, a local story and this is the way the community wanted to come together."

Julie Richards and her daughter Jessica Richards wearing pink fun run t-shirts smile in a selfie.
PHOTO: Julie Richards and her daughter Jessica died while on an excursion to White Island. (Supplied: Barbara Whitehead)
He said Julie's brother, Michael Richards, was doing "quite well" given the circumstances.

"It's a very difficult time obviously; his late sister and late niece are still in New Zealand," Mr Mickel said.

Why White Island volcano erupted with no warning
Why White Island volcano erupted with no warning
No matter how irrational it sounds in this age of technology, we don't normally see these eruptions coming, writes Shane Cronin.
"There's difficult days ahead and at a time when Queenslanders would be settling down for Christmas and working out what presents they're going to get.

"All the things that Queensland families are heavily involved in now, this family is going to be wrestling with that grief.

"There's nothing like community and friends within that community to help you through troubled times."

Money was collected at the vigil which the family plans to donate the money to hospital burns units.

"Because they understand that critical role that over the next little while, and probably right now in both Australia and New Zealand, burns units are going to be saving lives," Mr Mickel said.

"It's a selfless act on the behalf of the family."

A group of people sitting on a grassy area 
PHOTO: Family members plan to donate money collected at the vigil to hospital burns units. (ABC News: Talissa Siganto)
School community 'overwhelmed by grief'
Calamvale councillor Angela Owen said the pair were well known and loved.

"Jessica attended one of our local schools and was well known in AFL circles, and Julie had so many friends in the local community," Cr Owen said.

Julie Richards and her daughter Jessica Richards smile in a selfie taken on a beach.
PHOTO: Julie and Jessica's deaths have been felt throughout the Calamvale community. (Supplied: Barbara Whitehead)
Cr Owen said the incident had hit Jessica's school peers particularly hard.

"It is a tragedy and a lot of people in the community are reeling from this loss. It was so unexpected," she said.

"There are many young people particularly who are overwhelmed by grief, and at this time we ask that people consider how others grieve."

The vigil was held as more Australian victims of the disaster were formally identified by New Zealand police.

The death toll currently stands at 16 — including 15 people who died in New Zealand and one man in Australia.

Desmond and Linda Cornford left Brisbane five years ago because temperatures had become unbearable.

Key points:
A University of Tasmania study has found climate is the biggest driver of migration to Tasmania
Des and Linda Cornford fled Brisbane five years ago because it was "getting way too hot"
Australia is this week suffering through a heatwave, but Tasmania will mostly escape the sweltering weather
Mr Cornford said Brisbane was a country town when he moved there in 1977, but it had grown into a big city and he felt temperatures had soared.

"I think it has got warmer and I think the summers have got longer," he said.

"The winters, well there's really not a winter up there in our opinion, but it has changed a lot."

While much of the country swelters, Tasmania is being spared (mostly)
While much of the country swelters, Tasmania is being spared (mostly)
The same wind system that could push Australia's mainland states into record territory will have an entirely different effect on Tasmania.
This year, Brisbane's July was its hottest on record.

South-east Queensland is also today expected to break temperature records as the mainland swelters through a heatwave.

Mrs Cornford said the move was "just something that we had to do".

"It was just getting way too hot and the humidity was an absolute killer," she said.

"You couldn't do any gardening because it was just going to be too hot, you couldn't use your water because they were on restrictions. So Tasmania it was."

The couple moved to Port Sorell on Tasmania's north-west coast and couldn't be happier with their decision. In fact, they believe it's added years to their lives.

"Most of our time is spent in the garden which is wonderful, so that is extending our lives," Mrs Cornford said.

"We're exercising and we're enjoying it."

Climate most popular migration driver
The Cornfords are not alone.

A recent survey of people who had either moved to Tasmania or were considering doing so found climate and weather were the most commonly reported reasons for a tree change.

Environment was close behind.

A wooden thermometer climbs to 40 degrees Celsius.
PHOTO: Hot weather is short lived in Tasmania. (Pixabay: Gerd Altmann)
The number of interstate arrivals has also been increasing.

In the year to March, 14,521 people moved from around Australia to settle in Tasmania, surpassing an average of 12,874 per year since 2003.

University of Tasmania demographer Lisa Denny from the Institute for the Study of Social Change said in the past, employment opportunities, connecting with family and lifestyle reasons were the main drivers behind people's decisions to relocate.

"We were actually surprised that climate and the environment was the number one reason for people coming and for people leaving where they came from," Dr Denny said.

"The risks of more natural hazards and natural events like floods and cyclones and bushfires, the costs associated with insurance are making people reconsider about where they live."

'Last climate refuge in Australia'
Professor of Sustainability at the University of Tasmania Barry Brook said heatwaves on mainland Australia would be hotter and more extreme in the future.

"I've heard a lot of people say Tasmania's the last climate refuge in Australia," he said.

"Although we will have hot days, we're not subject to the same extended hot periods.

"Places like the north-west coast are particularly mild, they have got Bass Strait around them and I've heard of a lot of people seeking to move there to escape those extreme conditions."

How can the mercury plummet 10 degrees in 10 minutes?
How can the mercury plummet 10 degrees in 10 minutes?
If it's above 30 degrees Celsius in Hobart, just wait 10 minutes and you could be reaching for a jumper.
Simon McCulloch from the Bureau of Meteorology agreed.

"We generally don't get that really extreme heat," he said.

"So the temperatures on mainland Australia are pushing up into the 40s, we do get days pushing into the high 30s and the low 40s, but generally not a lot of them."

And Professor Brook said it would not be just humans seeking refuge in Tasmania.

"There are animal refugees and plants as well and one of the things I am interested in here is whether there's going to be mainland species not in Tasmania that can no longer cope with the conditions," he said.

"You see things that live in mountain ranges like in central Victoria in the Snowy Mountains, it might be their last refuge is Tasmania.

"So it's not just going to be people, it might well be species we have to think about moving permanently down here.

"It is a real possibility for some threatened ones, for example the mountain pygmy possum found only in snowy areas [in Victoria and New South Wales], if they're all gone from the mainland in 50 years the only place left [for them] will be Tasmania."

 "mega blaze" is believed to have destroyed several homes in the Hawkesbury area north-west of Sydney, where authorities issued an emergency warning.

Properties are believed to have been lost around Mt Tomah and Mt Wilson but there are no reports of injuries at this stage.

The fire was downgraded overnight to watch and act.

NSW Rural Fire Service (RFS) Deputy Commissioner Rob Rogers said there were reports properties were "impacted" after the fire grew "considerably" at its southern end over the afternoon.

Residents in Mt Wilson, Mt Irvine, Mt Tomah, Berambing and Bilpin have been told it is "too late to leave".

"Firefighters are trying to protect as many properties as they can but people in that area can see that fire's behaviour is really tough," Mr Rogers said.

The RFS battling through burning bushland at Mt Wilson.
PHOTO: The NSW RFS is battling a blaze burning in bushland at Mt Wilson. (ABC News )
Get the latest RFS advice here
He said the dry conditions meant fires were burning ferociously even without winds.

"We're not expecting a huge amount of respite," he said.

He said efforts over the next 24 hours would concentrate on strategies to protect properties ahead of the heatwave predicted to move into the state on Wednesday.


"People should be under no illusions, we're not going to get these fires put out," he said.

"They're going to be burning and they're going to be burning around homes throughout the next week.

"We're going to do as much as we can to protect as many homes as we can, but I think for those residents in those areas and firefighters, it's going to be a really tough week."

Captain Peter Duff from the RFS Terrey Hills Brigade captured footage of a terrifying wall of flames blazing at Mt Tomah.

In the video, posted to Facebook, a firefighter says they are tackling "spot fires galore" and flames 60 to 70 metres high.

A firefighter sprays water at a fire.
PHOTO: A firefighter tackles a fire at a property in Mt Wilson. (ABC News)
For more emergency information listen to:
ABC Sydney 702 AM or via live stream
ABC Newcastle 1233 AM or via live stream
ABC Illawarra 97.3 FM or via live stream
Elsewhere, residents in Bilpin have been warned to look out for embers, which are travelling five to six kilometres ahead of the flames due to windy conditions.

Several roads around the region have been closed including Bells Line of Road, where there are fires on both sides.

The "mega blaze" at Gospers Mountain has been raging for several weeks and has burnt more than 369,000 hectares.

The RFS said there were hundreds of firefighters on the ground, as well as airtankers launching fire retardant to help prevent the fire's spread.

A severe heatwave is expected to hit NSW by the end of the week, according to the Bureau of Meteorology.

A Larrakia elder says the proposed Charles Darwin University city campus will be "cursed" after university contractors removed a remaining historic milkwood tree in the early hours of Sunday morning.

Key points:
On Saturday morning after the first milkwood tree was removed, a small protest assembled at the site
At that time, NT Police stood down workers to seek clarification over the remaining tree's heritage status
A Charles Darwin University statement described the move to remove the trees as a "unanimous" decision from CDU, the City of Darwin and the NT Government
The 100-year-old milkwood removed on Sunday had survived multiple cyclones including Cyclone Tracy, but it was the proposal for a $250 million university campus in the Darwin CBD — the crown jewel of the Darwin City Deal — that it wouldn't survive.

Larrakia man Eric Fejo was responsible for nominating four city milkwood trees for heritage protection, including the two trees that were cut down over the weekend.

He said he wasn't contacted by CDU, the City of Darwin or the NT Government to be told that two of the trees he'd nominated for special protection would be removed and said he was "gutted".

"My belief is that these trees have got spirit in them, and this spirit's been cut down, and so this spirit is going to be unrested," Mr Fejo said.

"So this place as far as I'm concerned is cursed and they're going to build a place for educational purpose and it's cursed."

A milkwood tree lays on its side. It is chopped into pieces and a crane can be seen in the background. 
PHOTO: After a protest prevented its removal yesterday, a historic milkwood tree in the Darwin city centre has been cut down in the early hours of this morning. (ABC News: Kate Ashton)
'They don't understand what they've done'
Mr Fejo said the milkwood trees were special to him and his family, which is why he had nominated them for heritage status back in September.

"This place is very special because my father was born just over there," he said.

"This is on top of frog hollow and people used to sit down up here, under these trees, these ancient trees, they're ancient.

"I just hope these people sleep good at night you know.

"This is generational — they don't understand what they've done."

He said he was encouraged by the support he had seen of the trees from other Darwin residents including the non-Indigenous community, and outrage on social media.

Milkwood tree
PHOTO: After a protest prevented its removal yesterday, a historic milkwood tree in the Darwin city centre has been cut down in the early hours of this morning. (ABC News: Kate Ashton)
"There are people that do care, I'm looking at them now, and I'm really glad," Mr Fejo said.

"They might not believe in some of the stuff we believe in, but that's fine," he said.

Confusion over heritage status
On Wednesday CDU, the NT Government and the City of Darwin welcomed a conditional $150 million loan from the Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility which would help fund the new campus.

It was this funding which CDU said enabled them to begin preliminary works, such as tree removal this weekend.

Independent MP Gerry Wood hands out pamphlets
PHOTO: Independent MP Gerry Wood led a small protest against the tree's removal on Saturday. (AAP)
On Saturday morning after the first milkwood tree was removed, a small protest assembled at the site, led by independent MLA Gerry Wood, which prevented CDU contractors from removing the second milkwood tree.

At that time, NT Police stood down workers to seek clarification over the remaining tree's heritage status, leaving some with the impression that the tree would have a chance to go through the formal heritage assessment process before being removed.

It's a process that can take months, but that could have seen the trees granted provisional protection at the Heritage Council's next meeting in March — if they deemed the trees were significant.

The NT Heritage Branch confirmed the four milkwood trees had been accepted for heritage nomination on December 6, but that this stage didn't afford them any legal protection.

A Charles Darwin University statement described the move to remove the trees as a "unanimous" decision from CDU, the City of Darwin and the NT Government "following consultation with Larrakia Nation".

It said the site wouldn't be suitable for the campus unless the two milkwood trees were removed.

A crane hangs over a tree in the middle of a carpark. The tree is cut into many pieces and lays on the ground. 
PHOTO: After a protest prevented its removal yesterday, a historic milkwood tree in the Darwin city centre has been cut down in the early hours of this morning. (ABC News: Kate Ashton)
A statement from NT police confirmed "the removal of the trees was lawful".

Memories of Hotel Darwin
MLA Gerry Wood returned to the site this morning, to see that the tree he had protested for yesterday had been cut down before any supporters could arrive to save it.

He said the idea that this was done early on a Sunday morning is sure to make residents furious, and invoke painful memories of the surprise demolition of the Hotel Darwin.

"It's just an act of bastardry, the people who live in this city, have been left out of this whole consultation process," he said.

"Whether it's the university, the council, the NT Government or what, they've made some decisions about this piece of land, and they've not included the people who lived here."

McDonald’s has condemned the actions of a franchisee who was caught on camera abusing his neighbour over his Indigenous heritage, after the video went viral on social media. 

Key points:
Robby Wirramanda Knight is an Indigenous artist from Mildura
His neighbours Rob Vigors and Karen Ridge own the local McDonald's and travel agency Mildura Travel and Cruise
Police are investigating the matter and said no charges had been laid yet
The video shows artist Robby Wirramanda Knight being confronted by his neighbours Robert Vigors and Karen Ridge over his Indigenous heritage.

Mr Knight said he posted the video on social media hoping it would help combat racial "ignorance".

The video shows Ms Ridge trying to pull down Mr Knight's Aboriginal flag and saying "it's a disgrace".

"Which half of you is Aboriginal? You are not Aboriginal," Ms Ridge said.

Mr Vigors then asked Mr Knight "which 1 per cent of" him was Aboriginal.

"You claiming to be Aboriginal? You make me laugh. People like you make a mockery of true Aboriginals," Mr Vigors said.

"What's a true Aboriginal?" Mr Knight said.

A McDonald's spokesman said the comments made by Mr Vigors were "unacceptable" and did "not reflect the beliefs of the company as an inclusive workplace".

Artist Robby Wirramanda Knight
PHOTO: Mildura artist Robby Wirramanda Knight said he hoped the video would raise awareness and combat racial ignorance. (ABC Radio Melbourne: Fiona Pepper)
Until Sunday, Mr Vigors was the owner of Mildura McDonald's but in a separate statement the McDonald's spokesman said the company had "taken over the operation" of the franchise and that Mr Vigors had "left the system" and was "no longer involved".

"The matter is currently under investigation," the spokesman said.

McDonald's would not confirm whether or not their reasoning for the takeover was linked to the video. It is believed Mr Vigors was looking to step away from the business anyway.

Mr Vigors has been approached multiple times for comment on the phone and at his home.

It is understood the neighbours were arguing about Mr Vigors and Ms Ridge's dog before Mr Knight began filming.

Ms Ridge owns local travel company Mildura Travel and Cruise and replied to a Facebook message from the ABC saying she has "received death threats" and does not "feel safe commenting at this time".

Ms Ridge claims "there are always two sides to every story" and alleges "there was a great deal of harassment before this event".

Mr Knight said the dispute began when he raised issues about the couple's dog.

"Everything that unfolded here so far actually began, or I thought it began from when I'd asked her to put her dog away."

A selfie of Rob Vigors and Karen Ridge, who is wearing sunglasses, on a beach smiling.
PHOTO: Rob Vigors and Karen Ridge were caught on camera verbally attacking Robby Wirramanda Knight over his Indigenous heritage. (Facebook: Karen Ridge)
Mr Knight told the ABC racist attacks on Indigenous Australians had to stop and hoped the video would raise awareness.

"It's just ignorance, so if anything, if the video can help to remove a little bit of the ignorance from society it would be great," Mr Knight said.

"All I'm asking for is the old Aussie fair go. For someone to call me a government bludger is a sickening insult, especially given how hard I've worked to try and dig myself out of this intergenerational rut that I was born into."

Mildura Police Sergeant Leigh Macintyre said police were "conducting an ongoing investigation into the matter".

"No charges have been laid at this stage. Uniform police did attend," Sergeant Macintyre said.

A sit-in at Mildura McDonald's was planned for Sunday afternoon but was called off after comments from McDonald's emerged.

The 73-year-old pilot who was one of two people killed in a Far North Queensland plane crash has been remembered as a "colourful character" and experienced flyer.

Key points:
William Scott-Bloxam, 73, was an experienced pilot and owner of air transport companies
He was a member of the "Marauke Five" group detained in Indonesia in 2008
The ATSB and CASA are investigating the cause of the fatal Mareeba crash
William Scott-Bloxam and a 63-year-old passenger were believed to be on a training flight when their plane crashed into a field on the perimeter of the Mareeba Aerodrome, west of Cairns.

Police said they would investigate reports from witnesses who heard a strange sound from the engine, described by one person as "backfiring".

Mr Scott-Bloxam was still alive after the crash but he could not be saved by paramedics and died at the scene.

He came to national attention in 2008 as the pilot of a flight to the Papuan town of Merauke in which he and four others were detained by Indonesian authorities for entering without a visa.

They became known as the "Merauke Five" and were held for several months. They were eventually sentenced to between two and three years' jail each.

Following intervention from the Australian Government, their convictions were dismissed by Indonesia's Supreme Court and they returned home in June 2009.

A twin-engine aircraft parked on an airport tarmac
PHOTO: An Angel 44 plane similar to the one that crashed near Mareeba Aerodrome on Saturday morning. (angelaircraft.com)
Cook Shire Council Mayor Peter Scott said Mr Scott-Bloxam, also known as Scotty, was a loved member of the Cooktown community.

"He weathered that storm [in Indonesia] and came out of it okay and he still retained his sense of humour and good nature," Cr Scott said.

"Scotty and [his wife] Vera have been very much a part of our community for many, many years," Cr Scott said.

"They came here and ran the Milkwood Lodge which is an accommodation place just on the edge of town.

"And Scott also had a number of airways — he had Cape Air Transport and he was flying for another lot at one stage.

Cr Scott described Mr Scott-Bloxam as a "colourful character" who was very well known among town of 3,000 people.

A wheel of the aircraft can be seen among corn crops in Mareeba.
PHOTO: The wreckage of the aircraft was described as "significant" by police. (ABC News: Brendan Mounter)
"He was a patrol officer up at Papua New Guinea in his early days and I think a Lufthansa commercial pilot where he met his wife, Vera," he said.

"They've been here probably an and off a little bit over the past 20 years or so, but very much loved and real characters.

"We all know each other here."

The Australian Transport Safety Bureau and the Civil Aviation Safety Authority are still trying to determine what caused Mr Scott-Bloxam's Angel 44 twin-engine plane to crash.

Detective Acting Inspector Kev Goan described the incident as a tragedy.

"It's just a horrible, horrible tragedy that these people are going to live with for a very long time," he said

The City of Karratha has decided to partner with builders and developers and invest up to $35 million of ratepayer funds to boost local housing stock for an expected industrial boom next year.

Key points:
The council is hoping that by helping kickstart the housing market it can keep rent and home ownership affordable
$65 billion worth of industrial projects are expected to employ up to 14,200 new staff in coming years
But home owners are concerned house values will be kept below what they paid in last the boom
Mayor Peter Long said if nothing was done, small-business owners and non-resource workers could suffer the same exorbitant rents — some upwards of $2,000 a week — that occurred during the last boom cycle.

He said already rising rents, a 1.5 per cent availability of housing stock (down from 7 per cent over the past six years), and little appetite for banks to lend money to the 6714 postcode were reasons for council to influence the market.

"We don't particularly want to spend the money, but it's very important to us to get the market active," Cr Long said.

"We are concerned that prices will go up so much that ordinary mums and dads just won't be able to afford to live here any longer and will leave."

a sign
PHOTO: Land for sale in Karratha since 2014. (ABC Pilbara: Jordan Wickerson)
Council's money in the bank currently collects only 1.3 per cent interest, so by helping kickstart the housing market it hopes to get a higher financial return in collaboration with developers.

While there are 8,500 residential properties within city limits of Karratha, Dampier, Roebourne, Wickham and Point Samson, the need for more is growing fast, with some builders thinking council's move is 12 months too late.

Meetings were held with builders this week in Perth and Karratha to present ideas and discuss potential expressions of interest.


INFOGRAPHIC: This half-yearly housing and land snapshot shows a lack of listings in Karratha. (Supplied)
One local builder said he'd had around 50 calls for quotes in recent months, but added that building in Karratha was exorbitantly expensive due to cyclone ratings, transport of materials and labour costs.

Kim Janney, a partner in the building company TIMIK, said it cost around $750,000 to build a new four-bedroom, two-bathroom (4x2) house in Karratha.

He said a recent call for expressions of interest by Landcorp for builders to develop house-and-land packages for $550,000 would only deliver a 2x1 house with a single carport, where the house cost was effectively $350,000.

"I'm not 100 per cent convinced that a lot of the numbers will stack up for both the City of Karratha and/or any developer that turns up."

Mr Janney said his margins for residential builds were extremely low, in the single digits, so TIMIK had to diversify to industrial builds.

He said the two-family company would need to build 30 houses per year to make ends meet if it was only doing residential work.

A sign
PHOTO: It is quite expensive to build in Karratha. (ABC Pilbara: Jordan Wickerson)
Not everyone likes the idea
Home owners who bought when it was cheaper than renting are concerned house values will be kept below what they paid in the boom.

Renters, meanwhile, have experienced rapid rent increases in 2019.

"My landlord is not renewing my lease so he can raise it from $425 to $850," Ollie Lewis said.

"I'm looking at moving back home as I'm unable to afford to live in Karratha anymore."


Venne Kurilowski, in a comment on ABC Pilbara's Facebook page, said the idea was hugely ironic and short-sighted.

"This will hurt the existing home owners who are funding this experiment," she said.

"I don't expect my rates to go into projects that aim to directly reduce the value of my house or its earning potential.

"If we need more houses and buildings, then I'd rather see the investment of just a fraction of that money into providing reasonably priced lifestyle blocks, with a few acres for residents to invest in and build their own houses for the long-term benefit to the liveability up here."

Multi-billion-dollar projects to fuel boom
While infrastructure such as land, electricity, water, roads, telecommunications and sewerage are all ready for the boom, issues remain with the shortfall in financial capital, build costs and the availability of building companies on the ground.

A total of $65 billion worth of industrial projects are expected to employ up to 14,200 new staff during the emerging construction phase of resource developments, with ongoing operational staff numbers tipped to be 2,915.

solar panels
PHOTO: Solar panels power Karratha's airport. (Supplied: City of Karratha)
Perdaman urea, Woodside Scarborough gas, Yara hydrogen, BCI mineral salts, BBI's new port development, Rio Tinto and FMG iron ore mines, as well as gold, precious metals and solar projects, are either already funded or expected to be funded in 2020.

The council wants rapid delivery of new housing stock for the sub-contracting small-business workforce that will support the industrial projects.

"It's for ordinary people who can't afford the ridiculous rents which we had during the last boom of around $2,000 per week and house prices up to $1 million or more," Cr Long said.

Another boom without affordable housing would destroy all the hard work done by council to "normalise" the town, he said.

Vacant blocks across the Karratha suburbs Nickol, Baynton, Bulgarra, Madigan, Jingarri, Tambrey, as well as the city centre, are all included in council's vision for new residential development.

houses
PHOTO: Madigan Estate in Karratha has many empty blocks left over from the last boom. (ABC Pilbara: Susan Standen)
A large block near the new Red Earth Arts Centre is slated for 100 apartments above a visitors' centre, museum, arts, cultural and retail space.

Proposals by builders and developers will be assessed by the council after the February 5 deadline, with building expected to begin in June.

In a statement, the Government said it was exploring ways to mitigate the effects from growing housing demand on the cost and availability of housing.

"As part of this, the Department [of Communities] is keen to work with the City of Karratha and industry to create a more stable market in the region.

"The department is also investigating opportunities that may be available from its land assets in Port Hedland and Karratha."